Thank you, friends. Thank you, friends. Thanks, everyone, for joining in. So the topic of today
kind of overarching is the Dudjom Tersar Ngondro. And so then we'll just take a little bit of
time here at the beginning to kind of just reflect and connect on the Dharma, on the teachings.
And the topic today, I think I titled it the never ending story, the never ending story.
And so to begin, as we always begin, try to really reactivate the proper motivation. What
we're trying to do here is really like see everything as Dharma. And so doing these prayers
that we just did, praying to lamas of the lineage, making an offering of things that
we consider precious and sacred in honor of the Dharma, trying to really genuinely connect
with the Dharma. We're trying to align ourselves or attune ourselves to really be able to see
that the Dharma is everywhere and all the time, outside and inside. We're really trying
to become receptive to like just recognize nature happening now in everything happening
with us, what we experience, what we think, what we feel, what's around us. This is all
Dharma, cause and effect, interdependence. We're kind of unavoidably always in the Dharma.
The question is, how much do we really connect to that? How much do we really resonate with
that or see according to how the nature is? So all these kind of preparatory things are
trying to intentionally align or activate a certain motivation. They're so important in
terms of the Buddha's teaching. Because just not being natural, not seeing clearly like
that's the cause of all of our problems, all the suffering we go through and we go through
so much suffering. It's just not being natural. It's when we're not natural, when we don't
see the Dharma and we don't really let ourselves be Dharma, then that disjunct from our naturalness
or just natural relaxed kind of state, natural unconditioned way of being, the degree to
which we don't see that, that we're not natural, that's how much we'll suffer. So we really,
it's so important to really genuinely try to really activate this fresh motivation that's
totally lined up with Dharma. And these lineage masters, we have all these treasures that
they've given us of how we can so easily line up with Dharma, with our own nature, with
each other. And the specific treasure I'm referring to here is how always these great
masters including Venerable Kemper Rinpoche's, they remind us to really become suitable vessels
to recognize the Dharma, to be the Dharma. And that's these three things that they always
point to at the beginning of every teaching or every time we study Dharma, every time we
practice is to activate our motivation known as renunciation, bodhicitta, and pure perception.
Renunciation is often talked about by Venerable Kemper Rinpoche is joy and appreciation, gratitude,
gratefulness, a sense of awe and wonder, how amazing this is to really activate that preciousness,
the kind of precious like fresh vision. Like wow, how amazing it is to breathe now, to
have the time to just relax and kind of reflect on the Dharma, to try to connect to the Dharma,
to activate our motivation of love and compassion for all beings. How amazing this opportunity
is. This is all renunciation. We're renouncing our close-mindedness. We're renouncing all
of our unnecessary tightness. We're renouncing all the ways that we keep hitting ourselves
against our own walls. We're letting that go for a little bit of time and we're just
to relax, enjoy, enjoy the nature, relax at ease and just be in awe of these beautiful
things we have, these simple things around inside of us, right around us, our family
and friends, that we have food in our bellies, that we're not dying right now. We have so
many luxuries, so many freedoms, right? So really that joy and appreciation or renunciation,
we're just activating that. And then secondly, bodhicitta, the heart-mind of awakening of
enlightenment. This fresh, deep, kind of tender hearted, kind of strength and courageous vision.
Every single being, our own nature is utterly happy already. And if we don't see this, we
suffer so much. And so for all the beings suffering, wondering, trying to get out of
our suffering, we have compassion. I want to help them. I want to help myself get out
of this cycle, this kind of endless cycle of suffering. I want to help all beings do
the same thing. So by this activity, reflecting on the Dharma, connecting with the Dharma,
when you practice the Dharma, may this become of secondary conditions, principal secondary
condition for every single being to awaken from the nightmare of suffering, to completely
eliminate the causes of suffering. And then thirdly, pure perception, these three vajras
trying to directly experience right now, the pure body, pure speech, pure mind. How is
my kind of body when I'm not unnecessarily tight and tense and shut down and locked up?
How's my speech, my energy, my wind, the circulation, kind of this vibrancy of life? How is it when
I can just let it free flow? Just breathe and let it come in, let it go out, let it
pause, let it refresh. What's energy like when I just really kind of connect and like
really I'm in touch with kind of this energy, this breathing, the breath, the air of life?
Pure speech, pure mind. What's my mind like when I'm not always kind of caught in trying
to either kind of grab something that's not there, push away something that's there, or
it is constantly trying to change what's happening instead of just being with what's happening.
It's already dharma. My mind's dharma, my heart's dharma, your mind's dharma, your
heart's dharma, the nature's dharma, environment's dharma, beings around are dharma, it's all
dharma. How can it not be natural? So in that three vajra view, it can't not be natural.
It's always all natural. It's always pure body, pure speech, pure mind. There's so many
teachings on this. We just take a moment to really try to freshly kind of reactivate this,
at least for this short period of time together where we reflect on this, where the circumstances
are very supportive for this to happen a little more easily. We're not under immediate stress,
immediate pressure. We have a little window to just activate gratitude. Genuinely have
a tender heart connected to all beings. May all beings be free of suffering and the causes
of death. In this natural condition of everything, it's already beautiful. It's already wonderful.
Everything is already in its right place. It's just naturally flowing as part of a system.
Just relax in that for a few moments, activate these three motivations.
[silence]
For me to get to say a few words, it's in one way, genuinely exhilarating and genuinely
embarrassing. It's definitely both. What's going to happen? These are such sacred instructions
and teachings we've received. These are just reminders, things of trying to really touch
into these lineage teachings and really let them kind of move us, like really be moved
by them. But I'm really just largely reminding myself. And it's good. It's an interesting
phenomena that can happen. The more we hear these teachings, the more we know cognitively
conceptually like what we're supposed to do. There's what we should do from what we know
as Dharma people and what we do do, how we actually behave, how our mind actually is.
And it's an interesting thing that can happen. The more that we receive these teachings,
there can begin to be a gap between what we know and how we are. And that gap can grow
if we just hear the teaching, but we don't really put much energy or effort into actually
trying to apply it and actually be it, become it. And that gap can become very painful.
This is generally called hypocrisy, where I can I can mow the Dharma. I can talk about
this three true wisdoms and the four mind turnings and three, you know, three Vadras
states and these beautiful, sacred, profound teachings. But how much am I actually applying
in them in my life? How much of the time is my mind really turned towards the Dharma? Because
it's a beautiful power of one's own mind. If we really start walking a path of self-awareness,
we're really honestly trying to connect and see what is going on in my mind and my heart
all the time. More and more of the time, we're really trying to look. Then we kind of have
this first front row seat insider information with this private, very privileged knowledge
of how my mind actually is compared with what I say and what I do. That gap can start to
feel like a big, big pretend, a very big charade. Act like a Dharma person inside and so far
from Dharma. This is a really big challenge. We don't want this gap to get too big. And
that's the beauty of coming together that we can close that gap very quickly. All we have
to do is apply the Dharma right now. This doesn't have to be some big guilt trip. I never sit
down and practice or oh, I haven't done my accumulations or oh, it doesn't have to be
held as such a big thing. Right this moment, I can actually try to connect to the Dharma.
Connect on the Buddha, Dharma Sangha. Instantly the gap closes. Instantly I'm with the Dharma.
I say it's like a cave can be like dark for eons of time, but once you light a lamp, turn
on a candle, put a flashlight on. The darkness instantly is gone. And it's the beauty of
the nature. We can be disconnected from our nature for so long. It's like the Buddha taught
endless. It's like been beginningless time we've been wondering, but to refresh and reconnect
to our nature, it can happen right now. This is not an unsurpassable gap. We don't have
to just let the Dharma keep being a distant thing. Oftentimes it happens that we have
a very specific type view of what the Dharma should be, what I should be like, how I should
practice what real practice is in these very tight kind of boxy views. It's like very kind
of closed minded, like a really kind of formulaic way of thinking about the Dharma can zap the
freshness of just this instant and right now opportunity to actually just be kind, be compassionate
,
compassionate with myself. Listen to someone else aspire to be a bodhisattva. Genuinely
want to serve the Dharma and other beings. Then we instantly align with the Buddha Dharma
with the natural, natural systems, the nature that's happening right now. We can kind of
immediately close the gap when we just kind of refresh that. So let's not like forget
in my own mind, Oh, I'm not doing this again. Oh, I haven't done that. Oh, I haven't done
this. That can just become a very strong laziness where I just don't actually take one minute
to pick up a Dharma book. It's like this read a read a sentence. Oh, Dharma, I'm not Dharma.
I haven't done this. So there's all these books. I can't do this. I can't. I can't. I can't.
And it becomes this laziness that we get stuck in. And it's really kind of very self created.
So anyway, I know I do that way too much. So it's funny for me to get to say things about
Dharma now. But I love Dharma. I love Buddha Dharma Sangha. And this is directly related
to this kind of topic. I was thinking that the never ending story in one way is kind
of cute. The title is like an old movie that if you're old as me and have some gray hair
like me, maybe you know this reference, this reference of this kid's movie. I don't really
care about this movie. Honestly, it was just kind of cute title. The actual title to this
teaching is the never ending what? Which I told my wife Amanda earlier today, I was thinking
about giving a talk. I'm reflecting on this. I don't initially I thought to call it the
never ending what she just laughed straight in my face. Right at me. I could don't call
it that. It's a bad, it's a bad title. Yeah, never ending story. Go with that. What are
we thinking is going on here? That's really the topic. What do I think is really continuing?
What's continuing? What is this thing happening here? This life, this moment, my life, tomorrow,
today, yesterday, what do I really believe is continuing? The never ending what? What
is going on? What keeps going on? What is happening? Where is this leading? When does
it stop? When does it start? So that's the contemplation of this actually. And it works.
It is a story. The Buddha really taught all relative truth is artificial, fabricated.
This story is a fiction. It's always partial. We always get a slice of the pie. Only omniscient
ones, fully awakened beings have the whole pie. The whole infinite unbounded boundless
inconceivable pie. Only the truly unblinking ones have an unmistaken view of all of kind
of infinitely boundless interactive cause and effect. Every other being has a slice, big
slices, medium slices, smaller slices, rotten slices, really way too salty slices, all kinds
of different partialities. But it's all partial for relative truth. If we only get one part,
we hold on that one part, that's called a partial view. Usually it's called conception
or duality mind. That duality mind has a framework. That framework always leaves something outside
of its edge. There's always a border to duality mind. This, not that. Yes, not no. Always
has a boundary. And outside of the boundary is where we have no clue. We're like totally
guessing. In Buddha's bodhisattvas, the really fully awakened ones, they don't have a boundary
there. They say it's all story. It's endless stories, small story, big story, sub story,
endless. So the reflection here is what do we think is actually endless? What is happening?
And to just be kind of a little more straight up about this, I know a lot of people and
myself too, things get too much for me. And I hear this. Too much happening. There's too
much going on. I can't take it. Too much news, too much information, too many bad things,
too much juggling, too many responsibilities, too much pressure, too many bills, too many
subscriptions, too many choices, too many, too much, too much. Overwhelm. This is more
and more. I hear about this more and more and more. I can relate to this, sympathize
with this more and more and more. But in general, this kind of experience, from my own reflection,
I'm not saying I'm not out of it. I'm in that. In my reflection, this kind of experience
is what's going on here, what's continuous. A bunch of crap. Samsara. This is all just
samsara. Too much, too much, too much, too much, too much. Bad, bad, bad, bad. And if
we use that view well, we can do a lot of work. We can really get out of samsara. We
can become liberated. The four mind turnings, one of them is recognizing suffering for suffering.
The nature of samsara, the nature of grasping conditioned existence is suffering, dissatisfaction,
fundamentally uncertain. It's disturbing. It's very disquieting. It's fundamentally uneasy.
It's restless. It's really just relentlessly anxious. That's the nature of this graspy
mind. So if we can use that recognition, that view, it's a partial vision, relative view,
it's actually what's non-graspy mind like? What's it like to not grab it? What's it like
to not try to push something away? To not try to unrealistically hold onto something
when it's leaving? What's that like? This is freedom. The Buddha calls it nirvana. Or
we could say more colloquially, secularly, natural. Natural. Come and go. But it's tricky
because if we don't use that recognition of this is really tough, life is really tough.
If we don't use that recognition as fuel to undo our habits of locking up, then we're
really just grabbing onto samsara more strongly. That's a big danger. Because this world and
this experience, all these kinds of things around us, so much of mainstreamness and that
is really asking us to be upset and to stay upset. What's going on? Bad news. What should
I do about it? I don't know, but it's bad. It's not saying what to do about it. Well,
there's four noble truths and there's a way out of suffering and there's a path and this
is the steps and I support you to come out of it. Be free. Discover nirvana. Find non-grasping
awareness, wisdom mind. They don't add that part. But as Buddhists, we really need to
remember that part because if it's only the first noble truth and there's no second, third,
fourth, then it's just suffering, suffering, suffering, suffering. It's not a complete
path. It's even not even a correct diagnosis because we just say what is the nature, what
is the cause of samsara? But we don't recognize nirvana and the cause of nirvana and that's
very problematic because it's just going to, everything's going to just suck. And then
we hear teachings like, oh, it doesn't have to suck. There's freedom. Oh, there's things
you can do about it. Do this. And then we still believe this is really just bad. Then
there's all these paths and we learn these things, but we're not doing them. Then the
gap increases. Then we feel worse and we feel guilty, put all that stuff on. Then it is
more and more distant. And then it kind of ends up being this kind of like thing that
was good once. And it's really, we really should try to avoid that and we can just instantly
come together, be together, reflect on the Dharma a little bit, sink into our practice
a little bit, ease up, ease up ourselves a little bit, shake it up a little bit, go for
a walk, call a friend you haven't kind of talked with, ask for help if you need it, write
a letter to your teacher. Just make, connect. There's really small, simple things we can
do. Come to a beautiful place like this, be together. Consider, oh, someone else is going
through something. Really, oh, pray for them. Oh, instead of what's wrong with me, what's
bad for me, what's bad. It's like, oh, this person's going through this thing. I really
wish this really resolves for them. And they become free of that, genuinely. And then instantly
your mind's with Dharma. This natural, this compassion just starts coming out and it feels
so good. Like there's so much joy in really connecting with someone else. Oh, really?
Oh, you won that? Well, that happened to you? It was good? Oh, that's so great. I'm so happy
for you. Yes, it's so wonderful. Instantly, we're just buoyed up. That's totally Dharma.
We're in Dharma, right? That instant. And I'm really practical about these things in one
way. I like it. I'm practical, and I'm like magical. I like both. Practically, from a
Mahayana perspective, most practical thing we can do, honestly, and really kind of standard
Mahayana stuff, be reborn in Dehvachan. Life is short. There's Rinpoche, Kimbo Rinpoche
is taught very many times on the four causes of being reborn in Dehvachan. Wanting to be
reborn in Dehvachan, having a very clear idea of what that is, activating bodhicitta, doing
bodhicitta activities, dedicated for that purpose, and then dedicate the result of those bodhisatt
va,
bodhicitta activities. So all beings can be reborn in Dehvachan. This is very practical,
and very big view. But why are we trying to get reborn in Dehvachan? Then it comes to
our belief. It kind of shows us why am I trying to be reborn in Dehvachan. Because the only
good reason to be reborn in Dehvachan is so I can help other beings more. That's the only
really good Mahayana reason. This is suffering. Samsara mind is suffering. All the challenge
is happening, they're definitely suffering. And I want to put myself practically in conditions
that make it most easy for my bodhicitta to really shine on bright and steady. And Dehvachan
is the easy pure land to be reborn into, where all the conditions are going to support that.
They're going to support that bodhicitta to stay on. And then that's what the teachings
say. I believe the Buddha's teachings. Then you go through the boomies, the bodhisattva
levels so much more quickly, purify all these negativities, activate all these positive
qualities, totally intermingle with all the blessings of the noble ones, where there's
always 100% aligned with dharma. They're helping us be 100% aligned with dharma, the natural
system happening inside, outside, all around, all the time. When we do that boom through
boomy one, boomy two, boomy three, boomy four. Why though? But why? What is never ending?
Because a reason to go to Dehvachan just to get out of suffering is not the right reason.
Because this is very interesting, you get into Mahayana logic, logic beyond logic. And
you get into all these very big view kind of like understandings. Like for example,
time. In Dehvachan, time goes by so much like here, the time kind of a gap between human
experience and Dehvachan experience. He said something like this, about one day in Dehvachan,
one day in that pure land of Amitabha, is the same in human level and human scale, it's
like the entire fortunate eon for humans. All the thousand Buddhas that are going to come
in the human vision experience is like one day in Dehvachan. Time is flexible. But the
Buddha Shakyamuni also taught that this time in our world system, this is of all the eons
in all the different phases that universes go through, being born, expanding, staying,
attracting, dissolving space. Of all these different world systems that have come and
gone for countless time into countless endless future, right now is one of the best times
in all of them to actually become enlightened. So that's interesting. We spend one day in
Dehvachan and if we don't do it well, we're going to miss the most ripe time to serve
all beings, to be awakened. Because that one day in Dehvachan, all of a sudden all the
thousand Buddhas came in our human realm and we missed it. Why? Because we didn't have
the right view. What we thought was continuing, we thought it was just bad things continuing,
suffering and I have to escape it. We really need to do this as Mayana people, like that's
so central to the view is Buddha nature. We have this fundamental goodness, every being
does. That is what's continuing more deeply. Wisdom mind is what's continuing. Duality
mind is flicks on and off, on off, on off, on off all the time. It's just like a very
quick light that is always on off, on off, on off and it does it so quickly like a flashing
fluorescent bulb that it does it so fast that it seems continuous but it's not. It's just
a really apparition. But if our view gets a little kind of like shut down, we're not
as clear, then it seems continuous that duality and all the suffering is just a steady stream
of everything happening. But actually what's continuous is the Buddha nature. So that's
kind of a practical thing. This world is really going through things. Everyone sees it. The
Buddha taught about it, the degenerate age. It's degenerating. There's also so many beautiful
things happening. The world really needs us, needs us to really get more steady with our
bodhicitta. It needs us to not shrink away from the challenge. We can be very practical,
put a lot of time into like really trying to like activate our bodhicitta and have a
very clear aim of being reborn in somewhere like Dehvachan, having a very optimal next
life so that we can really get realization, so we can genuinely deeply help beings have
much more vision, much more natural, very inclusive, awakened, fresh vision to actually
know what is a cause and a condition in a certain situation. So how can we really more
effectively help sync up with the situation and really kind of be with it in a more natural
way? But we're not just trying to escape samsara. Or we're not just even worse trying to get
just a really good position in samsara. More famous, more wealthy, more people talking
about me, whatever, more all those things, the eight worldly concerns, which we know
about which they're just so fundamentally in that sticky mind has all those sticky things
it constantly getting hung up on. It's just how it is. It's how that sticky mind is. Sticky
duality mind always grabbing. So we really need to kind of self monitor. Oh, am I really,
what am I doing here? Am I really just trying to get bigger position in samsara right now?
And then that's worldly motivation. Then a bodhisattva or like, sorry, the so called
foundational motivation, self liberation. Am I really just trying to get out of the
stress of all this so I can be free? Like genuinely out, like out of samsara, like actually
achieve nirvana, freedom, cessation of all the suffering and the causes of suffering.
That's a good deep motivation. That's a liberation. But all beings were all stuck in these habit
cycles. Me, me, me, me, me. All of us are stuck in that wondering, drowa beings and anyone
stuck in that, oh, I really, what can I do to really most carefully, full of care, genuinely
help serve beings, serve the Dharma to help beings come out of this unrealistic, unnatural,
very partial distorted view of experience. Like a distorted understanding of what's continuing.
Because fundamentally all these views, the worldly motivation, foundational motivation,
the bodhicitta motivation or bodhisattva motivation, all of them are endless. Cycle keeps going
around and around. Cause condition effect leads to more cause condition effect. But typically
in the more worldly way, I know and I definitely have that personal experience and I definitely
know people, this is too much. I just want it to stop. And then there's different ways
of trying to go about not dealing with experience. There's a lot of, you can run it, you can,
you can run away, you can fight it, you can numb out to it. But what basically fundamentally
we're like, I don't want to have to show up for this escape. There's no escape hatch. There's
just not, not the worldly view, not the so-called Hinayana foundational view, not the bodhicitta
view, not the tantra view. There's no end. It really is never ending. And that is just
even as a conceptualization, as a belief that makes a very significant difference with how
we are in our lives. Nowadays, big time belief has a very bad rap. Oh, I'm just a believer.
What's it actually your lived experience? Not what do you believe? What's your life like?
The challenge is our lived experience always filters through beliefs, always as some sarka
beings. It's called conception. It always is going to duality mind, some duality portal,
some partial vision, some view, tawa, always is going through a view. That's a belief.
Even all the nine yanas, the first eight yanas, they're all filled with beliefs. Conceptualization,
dual mind, duality mind. It's only ata yoga, zogchen or Mahamudra, the highest ninth yana,
is it no belief. It's just direct experience all the time. It's not filtered with anything
that's distorting. But up into that, it all depends on beliefs, views, conceptual views.
And there's better conceptual views and there's worse conceptual views. And the nine yanas
very clearly teach this. The ninth yana is better than the ninth yana view is more direct,
complete and detailed than the seventh yana. 100% of the teachings teach that. The seventh
yana is more direct, complete and detailed than the sixth. There's totally a directionality
of views in ningma Buddhism. So the question is, these beliefs we use, it's a launch. It's
like a way to launch into non-conceptual, direct lived experience that's not mistaken. But
different beliefs help us launch more thoroughly, more fully, more energetically. So we need
to kind of acknowledge that. That's why there's study in practice. Study is conceptual belief.
Practice is non-conceptual wisdom. Study, reflection, meditation. Study, contemplation, meditation.
There's always these three wisdoms. We need to do the hearing study part and the contemplation
part. If we don't do those part and we just sit down and try to meditate, what we're going
to do is we're going to just be meditating on our beliefs and believe we don't have beliefs.
And it's going to really self-destruct. It doesn't work well. I'm enlightened, I'm enlightened,
I'm enlightened. So all these beliefs, I want a freedom, I don't want freedom, it's who's
the I, where's the freedom, how do you get there? It's all beliefs. So we should be really
clear about that because the belief that something's continuing and what is it, there's a bad thing
continuing and I need to get away from it versus there's this goodness happening and
I can just like be it. These are very different beliefs. There's a problem here that I have
to just stop versus there's this amazing, wonderful, infinitely creative natural energy
system, cognition, awareness, it's happening, Buddha nature. And even just to have that belief,
all of a sudden that orients our lived experience fundamentally differently. So there's a lot
of value in holding these certain kinds of beliefs. So what's continuing? To believe
there's Buddha nature and it's continuing. There are freedoms possible. What's the path?
There's a path, that's a belief. How do I do that? What are the qualities of achieving
that? I have all these books here and I really, there's like all these quotes I pulled out
from all these books and it's kind of like not getting to them. But they're all kind
of talking about this. What is it like this continuous point, continuous awareness? What
is Buddha nature like? What is bodhicitta like? So for future reference, if you want, what
I kind of really was ringing around for a while is this, if we look at the six parmitas,
there's the parmita of joyful effort, virya, then it's subdivided into three. And this
is in words of my perfect teacher, the great famous book, words of my perfect teacher.
And it subdivides this diligence or joyful effort into armor like diligence, diligence
and action and diligence that cannot be stopped. And then Venerable Kemperimica is in the ceaseless
echoes of the great silence. They have a similar thing where they go through these same subdiv
isions
of joyful effort and they call these three subdivisions unflinching courage, insatiable
effort, unceasing effort. And so in the midst of like really stress and challenge and difficulty
of life, which is definitely there, degenerate age is happening, is very strong being in
so many things where there's so many moving factors and it's getting more and more complex.
How to have an energy that like really wants to respond and like really deeply keep engaging.
I want to serve beings, I want to serve the teachings. Instead of this is too much, stop,
I'm out. Even if practically it's like I'm trying to get to dewachin so I can come back
really soon to totally be born as a little baby and like plugged into the AI current
and like yeah, you get to like full on be a bodhisattva with all this crazy AI everything.
Because that's much more of a bodhisattva view. I've heard that. I've heard that. I've
thought that to myself. You know, all this AI stuff, artificial intelligence. I'm glad
I won't be around to deal with that. I hope, I really hope I get to be born in dewachin
so I can come back right to the human realm, right on this planet. So I can be right in
the middle of this. Because this is the best time for awakening of as many beings as possible
in so many situations. And now we have this very complex, who knows what's going to happen
AI factor. And the Buddha said what's going to happen? A lot of degeneration. And also
this is the best time to wake up. We need bodhisattvas here engaging this stuff. Very
practically go to dewachin, get on the boomies, and come back here. And simultaneously you
can go to all these different realms and receive all these teachings of all these beings and
take all these manifestations and help in all these different ways simultaneously. Please
do that. I want to do that. Please, please. Like reflections, you know, there's one moon,
you put out all these bowls of water. There's so many reflections, as many reflections as
there are bowls of water. That the wisdom mind can be like that. Reflect totally just
dependent on what's the cause and condition of the bowl and the water. Be that flexible.
And please come back to do that here. Because this world needs that. It needs bodhisattva
activity. It needs bodhicitta blazing bright. And that's why we come to do this dudjimterasar
practice together. It's why we reflect on these teachings. Not to just get rid of all
this suffering, but so we can more elegantly, more creatively, more intelligently be with
the richness of life in its suffering and its tragedy and its horror and also its beauty
and just tender, like amazing connections. Like just heart opening, like just the wonder
of how much beauty is here. All these small little ways that everyone's so amazing and
incredible to really just savor that together. And it's both. And it's always both. And it's
heartbreaking and it's just heart opening. And to look at these noble ones that are around,
that are living and breathing here, that really have accomplished this vision and view and
to be in their presence and to learn from them and to receive their feedback and guidance,
their advice and to try our best to put it into action and to try our best to turn on
bodhicitta again, to come together as a sangha, to do this again and again so that we can
be more affective and like really showing up for each other, showing up for our own
selves, activating this like Buddha nature right now. This is the never ending story.
It's definitely, it's going to be never ending. It can either be a never ending nightmare
or it can be a never ending beautiful story or it can be just this never, this Vajrayana
view which we haven't really mentioned much. You, continuity, tantra. This isn't a story
anymore. Every single piece of the fractional, the fractal like ever dynamically embedded
like matrices of Indra's net is like every single little tiny pocket of it is 100% fully
awakened already. Nothing has to be changed. It's a continuous enlightened expression.
This is more Vajrayana view. So the pure land is not a way. The pure land is right now.
The pure land is my mind in this emotion happening right now. It's very nature is this enlightened
energetic intelligence, love and compassion like boundless. There's nothing that has to
be stopped. It's always here and happening. Just a question of like being brave enough
to really let yourself be with it and just fully sync up with it. And I'm definitely
not saying I can do that, but I've been in the presence of beings that very clearly can
and like how important it is to connect with them. Like with that in mind, I really do
this due to tears. I'm under a practice and as a final statement to this, which I thought
was helpful, is helpful for me to reflect on this. We all want simplicity. This is the
final summary. We all want simplicity, but we need to be really intelligent and discerning.
Have it really shine on our wisdom. Is the simplicity that we're wanting, is it the simplicity
that happens before complexity or is it the simplicity that happens after or beyond complexity?
Because these are very different things. There's like a very challenging situation. Do we avoid
it and don't want to deal with it? It's too much. And so we're keeping it simple by not
engaging something that's really very dynamic and kind of like a not easy to understand
that simplicity before complexity. Or are we like engaging a dynamic situation, including
our own minds? Are we trying to see like, what are the deeper ways that this is happening?
What are the elegant kind of ways that I can navigate this? Because the Buddha taught these
so many different instructions. They're called pit instructions that are actually simplicity
beyond complexity. The elegant points that bring everything together in a distilled fashion
that's easily practiceable goes right to the heart. That's simplicity beyond complexity.
It uses the fundamental essential insights of the complexity and it weaves them in an
elegant, simple way. E equals empty square, right? You don't have to know all the math.
It distills to a single, simple, elegant, comprehensive, non-distortive equation. And
Buddhism is filled with this only the liberative ones, not just understanding kind of like
how reality functions in this certain box, which is so important. But it's how to actually
see reality, the way reality is fully, the way enlightened beings see it. And these are
pit instructions. And there's two ways to approach a pit instruction. One is just with
blazing devotion, where we don't have to figure out too much. We have so much connection,
so much trust in ourselves and the teachings and the lineage and what the path is, that
we can just really keep applying that very pithy simplicity beyond complexity. And when
challenges come up, we go to it and challenge comes up and we rely and we rely and we trust
and we keep going. That's one way. It's very hard to do that way only. It's very hard to
have that much devotion. Then there's the other way, which is the path of a scholar.
Like we need to use this analytic mind, logical kind of follow through. Where did this come
from? How do I know it's true? Who said, what are the parts? How does it work? Is it true
in my experience? Does it change when things change in my experience? To really analyze
this. So we develop this trust over time. And then when challenge happens, we have basically
this kind of reserve. We've tested this. This is reliable. Our confidence doesn't just waver
because we've really tested and we've seen for ourselves over time with study analysis,
loosening of our partiality. We loosened it to become more inclusive with analysis. We've
loosened to become more flexible and now we establish confidence like that. And for most
people nowadays, it seems like the combination is what we have to do. We do need to analyze
and loosen to really like see for ourselves and taste and have it kind of go over in our
minds as contemplation. Then we really can also just save ourselves a lot of time trusting
the words of the noble ones, of our teachers, of the Buddha, of Guru Rinpoche, trusting them,
including him in the action, seeing for ourselves whether they're true over enough period of
time in our lived experience and we'll develop confidence and trust in that way as well.
With these two ways, then we can very actively, confidently kind of develop this simplicity
beyond complexity that isn't trying to reduce or dumb down the complexity. It's trying to
distill the essence and not waste too much time being lost in the maze of different considerations.
We're still trying to distill the essence based on the guidance of these enlightened
awakened noble ones. And in our own experience, we're also trying to like really see why that
makes sense conceptually, cognitively from a duality mind point of view as well. And
then we won't kind of try to avoid the complexity because it's just too much. And we're just
kind of trying to put our head in the sand because it's just not going to be a very successful
strategy nowadays. I mean, just straight up. It's just not. We're going to get like, it's
just going to be a lot of stuff. I mean, there's just a lot of stuff coming that it's not going
to be good enough to put ourselves in a bunker with some food and some water. We can try,
but it just doesn't seem like a very bodhisattva thing to do. Do what you want. But so that's
my pitch for the simplicity beyond complexity thing. And, but then we'll do that actively
in our experience right now by going right to the very condensed, essential pit instructions
of the duejum terra sarnundro, which condenses the entire path of foundational view, bodhisattva
jhana, tantra maha jhana, zogchen, all into a single, very simple, easy to practice set
of instructions, duejum terra sarnundro revealed by His Holiness, Duejum Rinpoche. So we'll
go to that now. And then this is, we'll go right into page, I think it's 17 or page 18.
A term of revelation of His Holiness, Duejum Rinpoche wrote this as kind of like a mind
term on this prayer, prayer of calling the Lama from afar, spontaneous song, the original
nature. So first we'll recite the seven line prayer once that's on page 14 in the daily
prayers. We'll recite it once because we already did three times earlier. And then we'll go
right to this spontaneous prayer, calling the Lama from afar. And we'll recite this
in English and then go into the duejum terra sarnundro altogether. So thanks so much, friends.
Really heartfelt, thanks. Great. Appreciate the time. Thanks. Yeah. Thank you friends.
Thank you so much. Dharma family. Thank you. Thank you. If you have like two more minutes,
I have like a summary thing to read. This has been something that I've really cherished
for so long. This comes from this book by Zoekser Kentsen Rinpoche, Not for Happiness.
And it's his chapter in here on the preliminary nundro practices. It's the chapter on bodhicitta.
And this has been, for me, one of the most significant chapters on bodhicitta I've ever
read. It's just so many insightful things that I'm really so thankful to contemplate.
And then one of these, I'll just read this. It's so deep. It's page 114. And the subsection
is called Develop the Strength of Compassion. So this is kind of the topic of dealing with
a continuous challenge, as well as the continuous goodness, Buddha nature we all have. So how
to actually develop the strength of compassion. It goes, until we have established a complete
understanding of bodhicitta, we will continue to make the mistake of imagining that pain
truly exists. As a result, we will almost certainly become the victims of our own compassion.
And without fully appreciating non-duality, our every activity will lead to disappointment.
For example, as a therapist, how far are you prepared to go to help an alcoholic or drug
addict? Imagine that one of your clients is certain to be reborn a drug addict from the
next 5,000 lifetimes. As a bodhisattva, your determination to help her should be so great
that you aspire to be reborn at the right time and in the right place during every one
of those lifetimes so you can continue her treatment. Fast forward to the 5,000th lifetime.
Your client has been reborn in a lonely, God forsaken country, and all you have to do to
ensure that she will never again be reborn as an addict is to hang out with her for half
a day. This means that you must also be reborn in that wretched place and that the entire
focus of your life will be to get you to the right place at the right time to spend those
few hours with your client. To do this, you will need what the teaching describes as strength
or determination. And you will only find this strength once you come to realize the illusory
nature of all phenomena, or in other words, emptiness. So how do you develop the remarkable
strength of compassion you need to be able to behave so selflessly? How do you develop
the determination to never give up? Where do you find the confidence and tenacity to
keep trying? Every one of these qualities springs from the realization that the drug
addict, her problem, that she can be healed, and even the idea that she needs healing at
all are merely the products of your own mind. None of it truly exists outside the mind.
And having realized this truth, you can go on to develop the strong and genuine compassion
that is bodhicitta. In the Prasanaparamitra Sutra, we are told that Buddha was once approached
by a bodhisattva practitioner who complained that, having dedicated many years to helping
sentient beings, he was now utterly exhausted. Buddha responded by explaining that time is
relative. The bodhisattva-yana teachings tell us that the period between the moment a bodhisattva
first takes the bodhisattva vow up until his last moment on the 10th Bhumi lasts for three
countless aeons. Yet one of the realizations of the 10th Bhumi bodhisattva is that all
of those countless aeons pass as quickly as it takes for a spark to shoot out of a fire.
And this is just also pointing towards absolute bodhicitta, that we have to really recognize
that to the flexibility of our mind, of our awareness, of experience, and that really,
in order to keep again and again showing up for our lives, showing up for each other,
showing up for the dharma, and to have that resolve to keep doing this until all beings
are free, that we really need to have this absolute, to grow this absolute, like dream-like,
absolute bodhicitta too, that that's so vitally important. And I say that for myself so much.
Without wisdom, this path won't work. It's all oriented towards prajna, our wisdom,
absolute bodhicitta. And compassion alone is not enough. It's not enough to just really care,
that if we don't really develop that insight or that vipassana, that wisdom, to seeing the
real nature of things, of our mind, of experience, it's just in the end we're just going to be
exhausted and we'll give up. So really, that in mind, we don't want to give up. We need to also
really kind of get a taste for the absolute bodhicitta, the imaginary, kind of illusory,
flexible nature of ourselves and others in this world we're a part of. So thank you so much,
friends. I aspire for all of us to actualize that, myself included, and we follow in the footsteps
of the Buddha and the noble ones to really make this happen as soon as possible for all beings.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.